Interview questions: 

1. Tell me about react, SSG, ISG, code to write prime numbers, largest number in an array

2. How do you cache API calls?

3. Higher order functions

4. Have you led or mentored a team?

5. Have you discussed with clients regarding their requirements? 

6. What is middleware?

7. Have you used meta data tags?

8. What is linting, tree shaking

9. How do you set app to production and development mode?

10. Next.js

11. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using Tailwind Css

12. Have you used Redux? Tell me about Context API.

Self Introduction (Professional & Confident Tone)

I’m Vishal, an IT professional with 8 years of experience, including 6 years in web development and 2 years in PLC programming and industrial 
automation.

Currently working at SourceSol Interactive on a client project for Windmill Technology, utilizing React and Next.js for frontend development 
and Node.js with Express for backend services.

My previous work experience was at Diksha Solutions, in project ThingsCode where I implemented JWT authentication, built responsive charts 
visualizations, and optimized app performance through efficient global state management using Context API and memoization.

I’m now looking for a challenging frontend or full-stack role where I can leverage my MERN expertise and continue to grow technically.
I possess strong interpersonal and analytical skills, enabling me to quickly adapt to new ideas and technologies. 
I believe in delivering quality work on time
I'm very enthusistic to discuss more about the job and what it involves.

Alongside my professional experience, I’ve been actively upskilling on production deployments in Vercel and Render for frontend and backend.

I started my career at Merisem Industries, where I developed a data acquisition system using Python, MQTT, and MySQL to collect and monitor 
live industrial machine data. That experience helped me build a strong foundation in backend logic, APIs, and real-time data processing.

Later, at Diksha Solutions, I transitioned into frontend development using React.js, where I built modules like user authentication, 
dashboards, and responsive interfaces for industrial productivity applications. I also gained hands-on experience integrating APIs and 
improving UI/UX performance.

In my latest role as an Associate Engineer at Diksha Solutions, I worked on ThingsCode, an ERP-lite application built using the MERN stack. 
I was responsible for building secure JWT authentication, responsive data visualization with Recharts, and managing global states efficiently 
using Context API and memoization to optimize rendering.


and building personal projects, including CashTrack, MonitR, and 
FoodVilla, where I’ve implemented real-time updates using WebSockets, server-side rendering, and deployed full-stack apps using Render and 
Vercel.

I’m passionate about writing clean, maintainable code and developing scalable, performant front-end applications that deliver a smooth user 
experience. 

I’m now looking for a challenging frontend or full-stack role where I can leverage my MERN expertise and continue to grow technically.
I possess strong interpersonal and analytical skills, enabling me to quickly adapt to new ideas and technologies. 
I believe in delivering quality work on time
I'm very enthusistic to discuss more about the job and what it involves.

🎯 Shorter Version (for quick HR or recruiter intro)

Hi, I’m Vishal. I have about 6 years of experience in full-stack web development, mainly focused on the MERN stack. I’ve worked on industrial 
automation and workforce management applications, handling everything from API integration and frontend performance optimization to real-time 
data handling.

I’m skilled in React.js, Node.js, and MongoDB, and I enjoy building scalable, user-friendly applications. I’ve also deployed multiple personal 
projects to production using Render and Vercel, focusing on clean architecture and performance.

Answers: 

A: 1. React

“React is a JavaScript library for building user interfaces, developed by Meta.
It uses a component-based architecture, where the UI is divided into small, reusable pieces. React uses a virtual DOM for efficient updates 
and supports unidirectional data flow. It allows developers to build fast, dynamic, and maintainable web applications.”

2. How do you cache API calls?

A: Short Interview Summary

“I usually cache API calls by storing the response in memory or localStorage on the frontend. For larger apps, I prefer using React Query or 
SWR for automatic caching and revalidation. On the backend, I use Redis to cache frequent or heavy API responses, improving both performance 
and scalability.”

3: A function that take another function as its argument is called higher order function.

function x(){
  console.log("Hello there");
}

function y(x){
  x();
}

4: Yes, in my previous project at Diksha Solutions, I had the opportunity to mentor a few junior developers and guide them in React 
development and API integration.

My main focus was on helping them understand component structure, state management using Context API, and best practices like memoization 
and reusable components to improve performance.

I also conducted short code review sessions to maintain code quality and shared knowledge about secure JWT authentication and efficient data 
visualization with Recharts — both of which were key parts of our project.

I enjoyed mentoring because it strengthened the overall team output and helped new members ramp up faster, while also improving my own 
communication and leadership skills.

5: Yes, I have. During my time at Diksha Solutions, I was often involved in discussions with clients to understand their requirements and 
clarify technical feasibility.

For example, when we were building a React-based dashboard with JWT authentication and data visualization using Recharts, I interacted with 
the client to gather details on what kind of data insights they wanted, how frequently the data should refresh, and what performance 
expectations they had.

After gathering requirements, I documented them clearly, shared possible UI mockups, and confirmed functionality before moving into 
development. This helped avoid rework and ensured that the delivered product matched the client’s expectations.

Software Development Lifecycle - Requirement analysis, Planning, Design, Implementation(coding), Testing, Deployment and Maintenance

6: Middleware is a function that sits between the request and response cycle. It can modify the request or response, perform checks (like 
authentication or validation), or log details before passing control to the next function or route.

JWT is a compact and secure way to transmit information between client and server as a digitally signed token.
Commonly used for authentication and authorization in modern web apps.

How JWT Works (Step-by-Step)

User logs in with username/password.

Server verifies credentials and generates a JWT (signed with a secret key).

Server sends this token to the client (usually stored in localStorage, sessionStorage, or cookies).

For future requests, the client sends this token in the Authorization header (Bearer token).

The server verifies the token’s signature to ensure it’s valid.

If valid, the request proceeds; otherwise, the server returns a 401 Unauthorized.

7: Meta Tags in HTML

Sometimes “meta” is used in a different context — HTML.

Meta tags provide metadata about a web page (information about the page, not visible to users).
Purpose:

Helps browsers and search engines understand the page.

Controls how the page behaves (like responsive scaling).

Improves SEO (through meta descriptions, keywords, etc.).

8:Linting
Definition
Linting is the process of analyzing your code to find errors, bugs, or style issues before the code runs.

It’s like a spell-checker for your code — it helps maintain clean, consistent, and error-free JavaScript.

How It Works

A linter scans your source code and checks it against a set of rules (like variable naming, unused imports, missing semicolons, etc.).

If it finds issues, it warns or errors out — depending on configuration

Tools Used

ESLint → for JavaScript/React

Prettier → for consistent formatting

TSLint → (old, now merged with ESLint for TypeScript)

Tree Shaking
Definition

Tree shaking is the process of removing unused or “dead” code from your final JavaScript bundle to make it smaller and faster.
It’s a feature used by bundlers like Webpack, Rollup, or Parcel during the build process.

How It Works

Modern JavaScript uses ES Modules (import / export).

The bundler analyzes which imports and exports are actually used.

It “shakes off” unused parts of the dependency tree.

9: In React, I use environment files like .env.development and .env.production to set different API URLs and build configurations.
I run the app in development using npm start and generate a production-optimized build using npm run build.

On the backend (Node.js), I set NODE_ENV to development or production and load environment variables with the dotenv package.
The production mode disables debugging and enables performance optimizations.

10: Yes, I’ve worked on improving SEO, especially in my Next.js project. Since Next.js supports Server-Side Rendering (SSR) and 
Static Site Generation (SSG), I used those features to make pages SEO-friendly.

I also optimized meta tags, title tags, Open Graph tags, and improved page performance by lazy-loading images and optimizing bundles.

Additionally, I made sure the app had proper semantic HTML, descriptive alt attributes for images, and a sitemap and robots.txt for better 
search engine indexing.

11. What are the advantages and disadvantages of using Tailwind Css

A: “Tailwind CSS is great for building fast, consistent, and responsive UIs with minimal custom CSS. It’s highly customizable and works well 
with modern frameworks like React. However, it can make your code look cluttered and has a slight learning curve in the beginning.”

Advantages of Tailwind CSS

Utility-first approach:
Tailwind provides low-level utility classes (like flex, mt-4, text-center) that let you build complex designs directly in your markup without 
writing custom CSS files.

Highly customizable:
You can easily configure your design system in the tailwind.config.js — setting colors, spacing, fonts, breakpoints, etc., to match your 
project’s branding.

Faster development:
Since you don’t switch between CSS and JSX files often, UI building becomes much quicker, especially for prototypes and component-based 
frameworks like React or Next.js.

Automatic responsive design:
Tailwind’s responsive utilities (like md:w-1/2 or lg:flex) make it straightforward to create mobile-friendly layouts.

Consistent styling:
Utility classes enforce a consistent design system across the app, reducing style drift and “magic numbers.”

No naming conflicts:
You don’t have to worry about class name collisions or creating complicated naming conventions (like BEM).

Tree-shaking support:
Tailwind removes unused CSS during build time, which keeps the final CSS bundle small and optimized.

Disadvantages of Tailwind CSS

Readability concerns:
JSX can look cluttered because of too many class names, especially in complex components.

<div className="flex justify-between items-center p-4 bg-gray-100 rounded-lg shadow-md">


Learning curve:
Beginners need some time to memorize commonly used classes and breakpoints.

Inline style feel:
Some developers feel it mixes style and structure, making markup less clean or harder to scan.

Less semantic separation:
Because styling happens in JSX instead of CSS files, design and logic can get intertwined if not managed properly.

Over-customization can get complex:
Deep custom configurations in tailwind.config.js can become hard to maintain if the project grows too large.